# WN 0015 - Arrays and Records

- **Status**: *Draft*
- **Discussions-To:**  [Slack/malloy-language](https://malloy-community.slack.com/archives/C06JR0C23RB/p1722981665815069)
- **Author:** Michael Toy\<michaeltoy@meta.com>
- **Experiment-ID:** _NOID_YET_

# Record operations

> Note: duckdb and bigquery call these "STRUCT" which is a C/C++ ism. Presto calls them a "ROW". I don't know what word I want to choose but I am avoiding "struct" because that is going to be confusing when a "StructDef" or "StructRelationship" have  nothing to do with a "struct" internally.

A record is a set of key value pairs. As a table column, a record is accessed exactly like
a one-to-one join is in Malloy.

| Expression | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| `recordField` | Mostly for `select:`, the entire field |
| `recordField.componentName` | The `componentName` field in the record |
| `{ name: 'Mark', 'source': 'referral' }` | Record literal |
| `{ name, 'source' }` | Record literal where key is implied from reference |
| `select: recordField` | Adds the record field to the output |
| `group_by: recordField` ??? | Maybe for join compatibility this should be `recordField.*` ???|

> Note: Should we use backtick quoting or string quoting for identifiers which are record keys? This
is made more clear by the structuring reference to source.

## Typing

Not sure we every have a need to cast to a record type, but for completeness, record types are written `<id:type1, id:type2, id:type3 ..., id:typen>` for example

    <firstName: string, lastName: string, age: number>

# Array Operations

## Brace Syntax Operations

There is use of `[]` syntax to provide based access and slicing of arrays.

| Expression | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| `arrayObj` | The entire array as an object |
| `arrayObj[0]` | The first element of the array |
| `arrayObj[n]` | The element at index `n` in the array |
| `arrayObj[...]` | The last element of the array |
| `arrayObj[n to p]` | Range based slice, starting a index `n` and ending at `p` |
| `arrayObj[n, x]` | Slice starting at index `n` for length `x` |
| `arrayObj[n...]` | Slice starting at `n` and going to the end |
| `[n1, n2, n3]` | Literal for an array with three elements |

## Query Usage

| Expression | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| `select: arrayObj` | Adds the array to the output |

> Note: `group_by:` not mentioned because, like `.each` the answer is different for an array of records or an array of values

### Other syntactic support

One can imagine other uses of expressions (instead of functions) on array operations ...
maybe even if we like some of those, they don't go in the MVP. Here are just a few
examples off of the top of my head.

| Expression | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| `x + y` | Concatenate the X and the Y array |
| `[ ...x, nel ]` | An array with all the elements of `x` and with one element added at the end |
| `x = [ 2, 3 ]` | True if x equals the array `[2,3]` |
| `x ~ [ 2, 3 ]` | True if x contains the sub-array `[2,3]` |
| `x ~ 2` | True if x contains `2` |


## Function Operations

There is a set of functions which take arrays as arguments which Malloy provides
translations for in every dialect.

MVP proposal is these are simply functions in the Malloy function library.

> Note: It has been suggested to extend the syntax of Malloy to allow a
> method like invocation `objName.split(seperator)`. This feels like
> an an entire new can of worms because we would want to make sure
> this could be implemented and didn't introduce new namespace problems
> since this would be yet another use of the increasingly ambiguous
> dot operator.

I am not sure which of these are essential. I have yet to do a survey of arrays
in all databases to see what capabilities they have. I have started with common
array operations in computer languages, maybe not all of these make sense
for database arrays.

> Note: It also isn't clear if it will be confusing to SQL people that some array
> operations are supported in `[]` syntax and some are in functions. We still
> don't have firm clarity on what it is OK to ask SQL users to learn.

| Function | Meaning |
| --- | --- |
| `split(string, seperator)` | Split a string into an array, using the separator |
| `join(array, seperator)` | Join an array of strings into a string, using the separator |
| `findFirst(array, element)` | Look for the element in the array from the beginning, return the index |
| `findLast(array, element)` | Look for the element in the array from the end, return the index |
| `concat(array, array)` | Make a new array from two arrays |

> Note: Names are not important at this point, the operations list for which we need
> names is more important at this stage than what we call the operations.


## Arrays of Records

An array of records in Malloy is treated exactly like a one to many join. An access of a field
in a record `arrayName.recFieldName` implies and un-nesting of that record and subsequent
expansion of the query, just as a reference a field of a one join would.

Similarly, when doing aggregation, the aggregation context is specified with the
field name path

* `arrayName.recFieldName.sum()`
* `arrayName.sum(math_function(arrayName.recFieldName))`

## Arrays of Scalars

The pseudo field `each` is used to indicate a reference to the array which is intended to
un-nest the contents of the array, as in
* `intArray.each.sum()`
* `intArray.sum(math_funciton(intArray.each))`

## Typing

Array types are written `TYPENAME[]` for example, `string[]` or `<firstName: string, lastName: string, age: number>[]`