# WN 0003 - Unknown Aggregate and Analytic Functions

- **Status**: *Draft* 
- **Discussions-To:**  https://github.com/malloydata/malloy/discussions/1415, slack, gchat
- **Author:** lloyd tabb

We can handle unknown scalar functions in the Malloy but we have to use an ugly workaround for aggregate functions and analytic/window functions are impossible today.  This is a proposal would allow the use of unknown analytic and window functons.

From the current Documentations:

> Many functions available in SQL are available unchanged in Malloy. Malloy provides some compatibility transformations for known functions. Unknown functions may be called like cbrt!(x) or timestamp_seconds!timestap(value) to specify a return type. For detailed information, as well as a full list of all available functions, see the Functions section.


Proposal, add more information to the functions so we can know if a function is scalar, aggregate or analytic

`calculate: per_rank is percentile_rank!number!analytic()`

`aggregate: a_count is approximate_count_distinct!number!aggregate(user_id)`

## Symmetric aggregates.
Assume all Unknown Aggregate Functions (UAFs) are asymmetric.  In duckdb, we can correctly generate SQL for UAFs but in BigQuery we canno. If you use an UAF in BigQuery in a context that would give incorrect results, we should generate an error.

## How create a UAF without this proposal.  
Adding an aggregte function in this context will force the resulting expression to be an aggregate.

`aggregate: sum(0) + uaf!number(x)`

## Unknown Analytic/Window Functions (UWF)
We shouldn't have any problem correctly generating code for all UWF.  If we see the function `sum!number!analytic(x)` we should write the SQL `SUM(x) OVER ()`.

