# WN 0019 - Filter Expressions

- **Status**: *Accepted*
- **Author:** _Michael Toy \<michaeltoy@meta.com>_

# Filter Expressions Overview

Filter expressions are a suite of pattern matching languages. Each datatype supported by filter expressions
has a syntax tailored the the datatype being matched.


## Filter expressions in Malloy Source Code

Filter expressions are written as raw-style strings with the 'f' prefix.

* Strings starts with `f` followed by a quoted string
* The quoted string can be wrapped with a apostrophe (single quote), a quotation mark, or the accent character (back quote)
  * e.g. `f'apostrophe'` `f"quotation mark"` or <code>f\`accent\`</code>
* The wrapping character can be escaped with backslash.
* You can also use triple-wrapping to avoid the need to escape in many cases.
  * e.g. `f'''Don't have to escape single quote'''`
  * `f"""The AI is "Smart", but not smart"""`


## Using a filter expression

Like a regular expression, a filter expression is applied with the `~` operator. Here are some examples

```
dimension: is_primary is color ~ f'red,green.blue'
dimension: is_single_digit is someNumber ~ f'[0,9]'
dimension: is_recent is eventAt ~ f'last 8 hours'
```

# Filter Expression Languages

## String Filter Expressions

A string clause is just a sequence of characters to match, for example `f'red'` will only match the string `'red'`, with the following special semantics.

### String Clauses

* String clauses are separated by one of
  * `,` (comma, see below)
  * `|` (meaning OR)
  *  `;` (meaning AND)
 * `null` or `NULL` to test for NULL
   * Escaped as `\null`
 * `empty` or `EMPTY` which matches either a null or empty string
   * Escaped as `\empty`
 * Can contains LIKE matching characters `%` and `_`
 * If a clause starts with `-` it means negation
   * -NULL means "IS NOT NULL"
   * -A% means "does not start with A"
* Complex boolean expressions can use `( )` to group 
* Spaces at the beginning or ending of a clause are stripped
  * `red, green` is the same as `red,green`
* To use any of the special characters `%_ (),|;` in a string, use `\` to escape them
  * Unlike many programming language strings, you do not need to use `\\` to mean `\` in an f-string
    * `f'100\%'` Looks for the string '100%' (`f'100%'` matches strings with start with `100`)

### The `,` (comma) operator

For string expressions, comma operates with minus (negation)

    APPLE,BANANA,PEAR

Will match any of those values, so comma feels like in IN list, or the `|` (or) operator. For negation,
as in ...

    FOO%,-FOOD

The comma reads more like "but not", and this translates to "starts with FOO but is not FOOD"

## Numeric Filter Expressions

### Numeric Clauses

* Numeric clauses are separated by one of
  * `and`
  * `or`
 * Uses `( )` for grouping
 * Negation is `not`
 * Can be a comma separated list of numbers
   * `f'42'` Will be true if the number is 42
   * `f'1,2,3` Will match any of those values
 * `=` followed by a list of numbers
   * `f'=42=` or `f'= 1,2,3'` and same meaning as the list without the `=`
 * `!=` followed by a list of numbers to indicate exclusion
   * `f'!= 1,2,3'` and `f'not 1,2,3'` mean the same thing
 * Can be an operator (`>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`) followed by a number
   * `f'>= 20'` .. a list is not legal here
 * Ranges using `to` and `[()]` to indicate inclusion or exclusion of endpoints
   * `[1 to 3]` ... >= 1 and <=3
   * `(1 to 3]` ... > 1 and <= 3
   * `(1 to 3)` ... > 1 and < 3
   * `[1 to 3)` ... >=1 and < 3
   * Ranges are also negated with not as in `f'not [1 to 9]'`
 * `null` (or `NULL`) and `not null` for null testing

## Temporal Filter Expressions

The temporal language works with both `date` and `timestamp` data. This is the most complex of all the filter languages.

### Temporal Clauses

* Are separated by
  * `,` (comma)
  * `and`
  * `or`
 * Uses `( )` for grouping
 * Negation is `not`
 * `null` (or `NULL`) and `not null` for null testing
 * ....

Here are some examples of time filter clauses, and a grammar for the full language.

* `before 2001`
* `after 2001-12-01`
* `2001-12-01 00:00 to 2001-12-24 11:59`
* `last week`
* `three days ago`
* `this month to monday`
* `yesterday for 3 hours`

```
time_filter =
    NOT? time_time_filter
  | '(' time_filter ')'
  | time_filter ("or" | "and" | ',') time_clause
  | time_clause

time_clause =
    'before' moment
  | 'after' moment
  | moment 'to' moment
  | moment 'for' duration
  | ('last' | 'next') duration
  | duration
  | 'null'
  | moment

duration = number unit

unit = "second"|"minute"|"hour"|"day"|"week"|"month"|"quarter"|"year"

weekday: "monday"|"tuesday"|"wednesday"|"thursday"|"friday"|"saturday"|"sunday"

moment =
    'now'
  | ('last' | 'next' | 'this) unit
  | 'today'
  | 'yesterday'
  | 'tomorrow'
  | time_literal
  | duration 'ago'
  | duration 'from' 'now'
  | ('next'|'last')? weekday
```
