# WN-0006 - Trailing Refinements

- **Status**: *Draft* 
- **Discussions-To:**  https://github.com/malloydata/malloy/discussions/1425, slack, gchat
- **Author:** lloyd tabb, Chris Swenson, Michael Toy

In the current Malloy language, the only use of a view as of a query refinement can be the first segment.  For a number of reasons we should allow views to be used any in order.  

## Example

A 'lens' helps you get a perspective on some object.  It focuses your attention.  You can point a lens at different object.  We will start with the semantic mdel below

```
source: flights is ... {
  measure:
    flight_count is count()
    total_distance is distance.sum()
    total_seats_flown is source.sum(aircraft.aircraft_models.seats)
    origin_count is count(origin)

  view: flights_lens is {
    aggregate: flight_count, total_distance, total_seats_flown
  }
}
```
In  can write two queries that give different views of the data, sharing the aggregate calculations.  The queries are concise and redable.
```
run: flights -> {group_by: origin} + flights_lens
``````

The ouptut columns 

> orgin, flight_count, total_distance, total_seats_flown


run: flights -> {group_by: carriers.nickname} + flights_lens

The ouptut columns 

> nickname, flight_count, total_distance, total_seats_flown


## Aggregates have a shorthanded
You can use the name of an aggregate and it is assumed mean a view containing a single aggregate

```
run: flights -> {group_by: carriers.nickname} + flights_lens + origin_count
```

means the same thing as 

```
run: flights -> {group_by: carriers.nickname} + flights_lens + {aggregate: origin_count}
```

## A more complex example
We can compose queries with different partials.

```
run: flights -> {group_by: carriers.nickname} + flights_lens + {
  aggregate: origin_count
  nest: by_origin is {
    group_by: origin 
    limit: 10
  } + flights_lens
}
```

The ouptut columns 

```
nickname
flight_count
total_distance
total__seats_flown
origin_count
by_origin
  origin
  flight_count
  total_distance
  total__seats_flown
```


## Making models more terse

Sets of dimensions can also be uses as a lens.  This is helpful when you always wish to show several related columns.

```
source: flights is ... {
  join_one: origin is ...
  join_one: carrier is ...
  join_one: aircraft is ...
  measure:
    flight_count is count()
    total_distance is distance.sum()
    total_seats_flown is source.sum(aircraft.aircraft_models.seats)
    origin_count is origin.count
    carrier_count is carriers.count
    aircraft_count is count(tail_num)

  view: flights_lens is {
    aggregate: flight_count, total_distance, total_seats_flown
  }

  view: origin_lens is {
    group_by: 
      origin.code 
      origin.state
      origin.city
  }

  // can use a dimensional lens
  view: by_origin is origin_lens
    + flight_count + carrier_count

  // can use add measures without typing '{aggregate: origin_count}'
  view: by_carrier is {group_by: carriers.nickname} 
      + flights_lens + origin_count + aircraft_count

}

```


## Parameters

Partials should work just fine with parameters.  Parameters can be passed to partials
 
## Parital Views

We should probably support partial views (views with only `where` or `limit` or `extend`) at some point, but I think that is a different proposal is that it introduces more complexity.  The use case would be for complicated filters.  Perhaps as part of parameters.