# WN 0000 - What's Next? Malloy Proposals

- **Status**: Draft
- **Discussions-To:**  malloydata/malloy/discussion [Process for language changes](https://github.com/malloydata/malloy/discussions/1400)
- **Author:** Michael Toy \<mtoy@google.com>

## What is a "WN"

A WN is a proposal for a change to Malloy which requires review and/or design effort which would make difficult or impossible to resolve by simply filing a bug. Is is pronounced "win" or "whatsnext"

## The WN Process

1. Someone has an idea for some work which needs a WN.
2. This person should begin a discussion about the idea. Possibly the idea is already on
   an existing plan, or is related to an existing plan.
3. If after some discussion the idea still seems viable, a draft WN should be constructed. Begin with the [template](wn-template.md) provided in this WN.
5. Submit the WN to malloydata/whatsnext as a pull request with Draft status.
6. The PR will be minimally reviewed, mostly to make sure the template has been followed, and then merged.
7. Now the committee will consider the WN. It will decide
    * To accept the WIN
    * To request changes
    * To accept experimentally
    * To reject
    * To defer

### Accept/Experimental

A change which is marked _Accept_ is a planned change to the language. Once something is accepted and implemented, it is part of Malloy and users can expect all future versions to include that change.

The status _Experimental_ is for changes which are understand well enough to implement, but the idea is new enough that it would benefit from some experience with the implementation. Users of an experimental language feature understand that their code may require change over the course of the experiment as this change moves towards full acceptance.

When a change is marked experimental, for language features, the following steps must happen.

1. The header for the wn must include `**Experiment-ID:**` _uniqueKeyword_ ( where "uniqueKeyword" is some sort identifier for this change)
2. The implementation of the change must check the compiler flag `experimental.uniqueKeyword`

Users can enable the experimental feature using compile flags

```
// Enable ALL experimental features
##! experimental

// or just enable a specific features
##! experimental.uniqueKeyword

// or enable a set of features
##! experimental { featureFoo featureBar featureBingo }
```

## Acknowledgement

This is a a stripped down version of the [Python PEP process](https://peps.python.org/). It is expected that this process will change as the Malloy developer community grows
