# WN 0020 - LIKE matching with escaped characters

- **Status**: *Draft*
- **Discussions-To:**  _Slack_
- **Author:** _Michael Toy \<michaeltoy@meta.com>_
- **Experiment-ID:** _None_

# LIKE matching with the `~` operator

Very early in the development of Malloy the `~` operator was introduced as a sort of "generic pattern match" gesture. When using `~` the rules were

1. At least one side of the operation must be a string.
2. If one side of the operation is a regular expression, then a dialect specific regular expression match is generated.
3. Otherwise the `LIKE` operator is generated

> _With WN-0019 (link needed), there is additional rule, if one side of the expression is a filter expression, the other side can be a string, number, boolean, timestamp or date, and the filter expression will be matched against that value.

No thought at all was given to escaping special characters in LIKE matches. At the time Malloy was more of a thought experiment, and if you needed to match a string containing the `%` character, you could use `r'%'` (a regular expression matching the `%` character)

This is no longer acceptable.

## Escaping `%` and `_` in LIKE match strings

Different SQL dialects quote special characters in `LIKE` matches differently. Some dialects (like Google's BigQuery) use `\` (back slash) to quote special characters. Some dialects, like PostreSQL, have a optional `ESCAPE` modifier to a `LIKE` which allows any character to be used.

To write "Does the field `strData` contain the `%` character you could then write it in the following ways

* BigQuery, using single quotes strings
  * `strData LIKE '%\\%%'`
* BigQuery, using raw strings
  * `strData LIKE r'%\%%'`
* PostgreSQL, using `ESCAPE '^'`
  * `strData LIKE '%^%%' ESCAPE '^'`

In Malloy, there needs to a dialect independent way to escape a special character, which then will be translated into correct SQL for the target dialect.

## Proposed Malloy `LIKE` string escaping

* The `\` character is the escape gesture.
* In `'` and `"` strings, this will have to written `\\` since the string itself uses the first backslash to quote the next character.
* We will addd a "raw string" to Malloy, using `s` as the prefix.

So to write, "Does `strData` start with backslash and end with %" in Malloy you would write either

* Using a normal string -- `strData ~ '\\\\%\\%'`
* Using a raw string -- `strData ~ s'\\%\%'`